Sonnet LXXXI
Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read;
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,
When all the breathers of this world are dead;
   You still shall live, such virtue hath my pen,
   Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.

我哀君已殁，君悼我飄零？
君名傳燭火，我跡釋壶冰。
華光鬱芳蕙，覆水歸幽冥。
零落新苔翠，凌寒古松青。
碑留我佳作，將感來者情。
今人長已矣，君容猶視聽。
君心與我句，時時在閑呤。

Commentary
1. Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or ... or = whether ... or. Usually the meaning is 'either ... or', but in this case both the sense and the sequel require another meaning. Hence: 'Whatever happens, whether you or I die first, death will not obliterate your memory because etc.' The interpretation, that since one of the two events is sure to happen, therefore the statement is banal, seems to miss the point. For this is not a philosophical proposition of the type 'if not a then b', but a consideration of what might follow in either event, and to boot a perfectly normal and heartfelt human concern 'What will happen when either of us two lovers predeceases the other?'

 

epitaph = an inscription on a grave or monument. The word is from the Greek, and was originally applied to a funeral oration. SB stresses the Greek origin, giving the derivation - epi = on, and taphos = tomb, grave. Strictly speaking the word is derived from epitaphion, being the neuter of the adjective and applied to a speech given as the oration over a tomb. (See OED). The most famous example is that of Pericles over the fallen dead in the first year of the Peloponnesian War, although the word itself is not used there. (Thucydides.II.36 on). One must question how much of this Shakespeare might have known, given his 'small Latin and less Greek', or, supposing him to know it, how much it was relevant to him in this poem. He may have had the more English custom in mind, that of writing an epitaph in verse, and publicising it, as Ben Jonson did, for example, for his son. (See below). In any case the word had the more general meaning of an inscription on a tomb, and figuratively that of a commemoration of a dead person. Here in the context of the sonnets already written in praise of the youth, and those declared as a monument for the ages yet to come, the most likely epitaph would be the collection of sonnets written with the youth as inspiration, this one included.

Ben Jonson ON MY FIRST SONNE

Farewell, thou child of my right hand and joy;
My sin was too much hope of thee, loved boy,
Seven years thou wert lent to me, and I thee pay
Exacted by thy fate, on the just day.
O, could I lose all father now. For why
Will man lament the state he should envy?
To have so soone scaped world and flesh's rage,
And, if no other misery, yet age?
Rest in soft peace, and, asked, say here doth lie
BEN. JONSON his best piece of poetrie.
For whose sake henceforth, all his vows be such,
As what he loves may never like too much.

2. Or you survive when I in earth am rotten,
As in Sonns. 71 & 74, the poet stresses the body's decay, a prospective fate which he applies zealously to himself, not however to the beloved, who, as it were, only dies by implication, and scarcely seems to rot. In any case the youth will have immortal life through these poems.
3. From hence your memory death cannot take,
From hence = from this world, from these poems.
your memory death cannot take - a reversal of word order - 'Death cannot take our memory of you away'. As in all these reversals, it is worth considering what the alternative might mean. Here it would be 'The memory of you, the knowledge of what you are and were, is not sufficiently strong to take death away, to obliterate it altogether'. The meaning is not entirely innapposite to the theme of the sonnet.
4. Although in me each part will be forgotten.
By contrast I will disappear completely and every part of me will be forgotten.
5. Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
your name - it is supremely ironic that the youth's name is never mentioned, unless in some discreet and arcane way. The only immortality, such as it is, which accrues to anyone from the poems, is to the poet himself, a point probably not lost on the writer. The conceit was in any case a common one in poetry. One suspects that a man who made no effort at all to publish his plays when he was alive must have written with tongue in cheek when claiming immortal life for the subject of his sonnets, however much it might have suited the perceived relationship between lover and admired youth.
from hence = from this moment on (?); stemming from these verses (?).

6. Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
to all the world must die = will die and be forgotten by all the world (while you, by contrast, will be remembered).
7. The earth can yield me but a common grave,
yield = give me, supply me with. The use of the earth which is usually synonymous with the world, is here suggestive of humble burial in the earth, in a churchyard.
a common grave = a grave which is like that of all other men of the common mould. Not necessarily a pauper's grave, but certainly an undistinguished one. In fact Shakespeare lies buried in some style in Holy Trinity church, Stratford on Avon, as a man of wealth and fame. But the exigencies of poetic style and the stance of humility which any sonneteer worth his salt had to adopt in the face of his beloved is enough to justify the self effacement which the line implies. The contrast is between that of the common grave which has no memorial, and that of the celebrated worthy whose memorial is his decorated tomb, or his reputation, or poems written in his honour.
8. When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
entombed - many tombs in churches were elaborate, and had carved alabaster or marble figures on top. They therefore were rather conspicuously prominent, visible to the eyes of parishioners who came to worship on Sundays and feast days. However the meaning here is more that of being entombed gloriously in these verses, as the following line makes evident.
9. Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
The idea of verse being a perpetual monument dates back at least to classical times. One of the earliest memorials in verse is that written by Simonides for the Spartan dead at Thermopylae, circa 480 BC: Stranger, tell the Spartans that we lie here, obedient to their laws. Monuments of a more traditional kind, which are here hinted at, were to be found in abundance in churches and cathedrals throughout the country. (See illustration opposite).
My gentle verse - perhaps it is gentle (mild) in contrast to the furious cruelty of time. The word in Shakespeare's day often had a similar meaning to the modern one, as the following examples show:

As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle,-- AC.V.2.

Her voice was ever soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman. KL.V.3.

But apart from that there was a strong leaning to its original meaning of 'well born, belonging to a family of position in society' (OED.1.a.) Consequently here it may be 'gentle verse' since only such would be fitting for a man in an elevated social position such as that which the youth is implied to have held.

10. Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read;
eyes not yet created ... tongues to be - future generations. They are figuratively represented by the parts that are involved in reading and declaiming the verses.
11. And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,
rehearse = repeat, recite publicly.
your being, = you, as described in these poems.
12. When all the breathers of this world are dead;
the breathers of this world = those who are alive now. You will still be alive (through my verse) when all who are alive today are dead and gone.
13. You still shall live, such virtue hath my pen,
still = always, for evermore, continuously.
such virtue = such power and essential vitality. such virtue has my pen - the poet temporarily lets slip the mask of modesty which he usually adopts in relation to his own merit as a poet. It completely contraverts the humility shown in the rival poet(s) sequence in the midst of which this sonnet is placed.
Q's punctuation allows these two lines to be read as a continuation of line 12, and it is at least as justifiable as that adopted here.

14. Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.
Where breath most breathes - rather an odd phrase, but it condenses the fact that breath is necessary for life, and also necessary for reciting poetry, so that the beloved lives in the place where life is most vital, through the mouths of men who recite his glory. 



