《解連環》

怨懷無托。嗟情人斷絕，信音遼邈。
信妙手、能解連環，似風散雨收，霧輕雲薄。
燕子樓空，暗塵鎖、一床弦索。
想移根換葉。盡是舊時，手種紅藥。

汀洲漸生杜若。料舟依岸曲，人在天角。
謾記得、當日音書，把閑語閑言，待總燒卻。
水驛春回，望寄我、江南梅萼。
拚今生，對花對酒，為伊淚落。

My sorrow floats when nought from my love heard.
Jade Knot might be resolved by clever hands,
yet knot of love breaks like short rain, or blurred
mist, or the carved words washed by waves in sands.
Thy dusty harp plays songs in empty house,
not by thy fingers, my decayed memories.
Flowers in garden my regret arouse,
planted by thee, once to be true treasuries.
Pollia grows but thou wander far away;
I burn thy words and letters in ashes,
still dreaming that plum bossom from thee may
be sent, like vain but splendid splashes.
   I will endure whole life without thee, dear,
   but with wine and  flowers, and my last tear.


My sorrow floats when nought from my love heard.
Jade Knot might be resolved by clever hands,
yet knot of love breaks like short rain, or blurred
mist, or the carved words washed by waves in sands.
Thy dusty harp plays songs in empty house,
not by thy fingers, my decayed memories.
Flowers in garden my regret arouse,
planted by thee, once to be true treasuries.
Pollia grows when thou wander far away;
I burn thy words and letters in ashes
to forget thee, yet dreaming that thou may
send me the first plum bossom with spring splashes.
   I will endure whole life without thee, dear,
   but wine and  flowers, and last dropping tear.





My sorrow drifts when nothing from thee's heard.
Jade Knots may yield beneath the clever hand,
yet love's frail knot breaks like short rains, or blurred
mist, or like carved words washed away from sand.
Thy dusty harp plays songs in empty halls,
not by thy fingers, but by lost refrain.
Flowers in garden my regret recalls,
planted by thee, once treasured, now bring pain.
Pollia blooms while thou dost wander afar;
I burn thy words and letters into ash
to forget thee, yet dream of that first star--
a plum bossom sent with spring's fleeting flash.
   I'll endure a lifetime without thee, dear,
   with wine, and flowers, and last falling tear.



# It seems not as good as the original one

My sorrow drifts when nothing’s heard from thee.
The jade knot yields to skillful, patient hands,
But love’s frail ties break easily and free,
Like brief spring rain, or words erased from sand.

Thy dusty harp plays songs in empty halls,
Not touched by thee, but by a distant strain.
Flowers in gardens summon painful calls,
Planted by thee, once sweet, now bloom in vain.

Pollia blooms while thou art far away;
I burn thy words and letters into ash
To rid my mind, yet dream of that first day—
A plum blossom sent with spring’s fleeting flash.

I’ll bear a lifetime without thee, my dear,
With wine, and flowers, and one last falling tear.


















