Mind of literature
Written by Liu Xie, translated by Zhengqian Cheng
Introduction.
Mind of literature is the first systematic monograph on Chinese literature written in Liang dynasty. The auther gives a throught overview of general purpose of literature, features and functions of various geners, and writing techniques. The ideaology in this book is consistent with another book, Zhaoming Wenxuan, which is an anthology of poems, verse, prose or any form that regarded as literature before Liang dynasty. They highlight the aesthetic viewpoint of literature that it should focus on the rhetoric and poetic nature of lauguage, without losing the artistic exposure the inner mind.

Chapter 1  Origin of Dao
The purpose of words is so magnificent as the creation of heaven and earth
with peerlessly virtue. Sun and moon enlighten successively in high worth,
while mountains and rivers script their beautiful passage with logic and reasons,
thus is the verse of Dao that rules motion of stars and change of seasons.
When I see the galaxies and stars or mounts and valleys, the high and low are ordered
so do the heaven and earth. And only man can be called as the third,
where the emotion and intelligence are embeded.  We shall call them three art,
with humanity the quintessence of Five Elements and the Universe heart.
So the minds give words, and words verses, and thus is the natural transform,
And everything, from animals to plants, do show their minds through exterial form.
Long[1] and pheonix augur the benediction via their algea-like notion,
Tiger and leopod display swift agility with beautiful fur and quick motion.
Cloud and sky blend watery colors so splendid that beyond any painter,
Grass and tree scatter witty followers so gorgeous that shame every carpenter.
Do all them just merely some decoration? Nay, they are the masterpiece of nature.
As wind flow through the woods and trees like reed pipe in farewell ,
Or the spring jumps off stones like piano in melody with metal bell.
As the form determines the passage, the sound the verse.
For things without conscious indeed have so many miracles,
why can't man, bestowd with a delicate mind, write impressive articles?

The literature originates from the beginning of universe,
as Yi[2]  the first to praise God and explain change and diverse.
Paoxi, the ancient king,  drew the Eight Symbols as fundation,
while Confucius explained them with ten chapters as completion.
Two symbols representing heaven and earth were treated especially,
in Wenyan. Oh, the art of writing is the essence of cosmos undoubtly.
Not to mention the Turtle in Yellow River brought Eight Symbols from picture,
or the Book of Luo River contained the Nine Categories in its structure.
As the golden plot in jade plate depicts the map of earth and constellation,
and the red ink in green page show the secrecy of the world's foundation,
Oh, who can reveal things in such an elegant way? Ay, it must be bound to nature.[3]
Then ancestors motivated to create the bird-trace like graphs to replace
the knots of string, thus the use of characters gradually appeared in every place.
The stories of Yan[4] and Gao[5] were said in Three Scrolls, but so far away
that we can not see, feel and analyse its words beauty in any way.
And only from Tang Yao[6] and Yu Shun[7], a few fragments had be preserved,
The king[8] sang the poem to express his mind, while Yi and Ji [9] gave their suggestion
to their majesty in a way laying down the canonical style of official documentation.
From Xia dynasty, the achievements in politics and civilization were more magnificent,
and poets praised grand order and great virtues in Nine Chapters which is so elegant.
Then in Shang and Zhou, the literature form and rhetoric skills were further developed,
The Elegance and Praise styles had covered broad topics and poems was so prosperous.
King of Wen, when he was prisoned, calculated and devised the Eight Symbols,
into sixty-four, with flawless styles as jades and sophisticated thoughts as crystals,
together with the cultivated minister Dan, who  strengthened this  great tradition
by collecting the Poem, editing the Praise, and decorating the daily composition.
Until the Confucius inherited from  previous geniuses with his own  fashion,
who rectified the Six Classics with harmonic sound and purified emotion.
He polished feelings and organized styles like wood bell echoing farthest locations
or precious pearl in table cherished and admired by hundreds of generations.
In one word, he scripted the brightness and beauty of the world,
and freshed people's mind with their eyes and ears impearled.

So from the king of Zhuan Xu to the Confucius,  with the classics as holy start
followed the remarks of normal genius[12], all is to along the Dao build the part.
We first study the mechanics of the universe and consolidate the moral standard,
then we can investigate the graphs from Luo River and inquire fate for the unanswered.
Then the exploration of celesital phenomena will explain thoroughly the rapid changes
and deep understanding of humanity will form and build politcal order in all ranges.
Thus we could manage and civilize our country and glorify morals and codify laws,
with the greatest enterprise, we make our words and passages shining without flaws.
So the crux  is that the Dao via those genius in words presents,
and those genius via their words to reveal Dao's quintessence.
Finally, we could free from distraction and using these rules forever.
It is said in Zhou Yi that what can moviate and move every crowd
exists in the words of signs, because it is an article of Dao.



[1]. One can literally translate as dragon and phoenix, but in western tradition, dragon is regarded as some evil beast, which is regarded as some divine animal in Chinese culture 
[2]  A colletion of knowledge about explain and predict using the Gua Xiang. The most elementary unit is Ying and Yang, rough corresponds feminity and masculine, which is written as two short lines or a long line horizentally. A Gua is a collection of three basic units, stacking Ying or Yang from bottom to top, and thus have 2^3=8 possibility. Then two Guas can have 8^2=64 possibility. The Yi and further development especially in Song dynasty try to assign philosophical meaning to there symbols and thus these to explain the general rules of cosmos, society or individual life. From the scientific perspective, these symbols just hold as a liguistic function, to record and organzie the ancients thought and experience in a beautiful way. 
[3] This part tries to dignify the creation of Chinese characters, which is claimed to be motivated from sacret traces, like the symbol in Yi and other books supposing to be given from divine spirit.
[4] king of Yan 
[5] king of Fu Xi
[6] king of Tang Yao
[7] king of Yu Shun
[8][10] refer to king of Yu Shun
[9] two ministers of Yu Shun
[11] king of Zhuan Xu
[12] As Confucious assemble Spring and Autumn as a official history of Lu kingdom, which is regarded as a moral standard and writng classics with feature like small word implying big meaning.


